COMP 315
Lab 4 - Reliable Transport Protocols – Redux

[image]

In this project, you will implement six C functions that provide a
reliable sliding window transport layer over an unreliable network
layer. Work submitted after the deadline will receive no credit. Submit
this by logging into cslogin.arc.rhodes.edu and changing to the comp315
directory in your home directory. Inside of comp315, follow the
instructions from the Github Assignment Link to clone the template
repository.
Your programs must compile and run on a Linux system. You should be fine
to develop these on a Mac or Windows Subsystem for Linux, but you need
to ensure that they execute correctly under Linux (i.e. I will grade on
Linux).

There is skeleton starter code in /home/comp315/lab4 on cslogin, as well
as a reference implementations of the server to test with.

Overview

For this project, you will be implementing a sliding window reliable
transport layer on top of the User Datagram Protocol (UDP), which is
unreliable. Your implementation should handle corrupted packets,
rudimentary flow control, and recover from lost or dropped packets. The
application should perceive the network connection as a stream-based,
connection-oriented system.

For this assignment, your implementation should operate in a
single-connection mode. Your program will take a window size, local UDP
port, remote hostname, and remote port as parameters. Any data read from
standard input will be transmitted to the remote host, and any data
received over the reliable connection will be displayed on standard
output. Your program will support two-way (i.e. full duplex),
asynchronous communication. Each process will read data from standard
input until an end-of-file (EOF) is reached, break the data into
fixed-sized packets with a transport-layer header, and transmit the data
to the receiving process. The receiver will read these packets and write
the data to standard output.

Implementation

This project consists of three files, reliable.c, rlib.c, and  rlib.h.
The implementation of the network layer is contained in  rlib.c, with
the interface documented in rlib.h. You should clearly understand the
interface and be familiar with the implementation prior of the network
layer functions prior to starting the assignment. This assignment has
been adapted from a framework developed at Stanford University and used
in their networking courses. The rlib.c and rlib.h files are unchanged
from the previous assignment.

This assignment will require the use of both send and receive buffers to
store out-of-order packets and to maintain data for retransmission, if
needed. The window buffer data structure is used for both send and
receive buffers and has the following structure:

         struct window_buf_s {
               uint32_t        len;       // packet length
               uint32_t        valid;     // this buffer contains a received packet (recv-only)
               uint32_t        ack;       // this buffer has been acknowledeged by receiver (send-only)
               uint64_t        timestamp; // when this packet was sent (send-only)
               packet_t        p;         // buffered packet
          };
          typedef struct window_buf_s window_buf_t;

- len: total length of the packet. Should be 8 for acknowledgements and
  12 + payload for data packets. A packet with a zero-length payload
  signifies an end-of-file condition.

- valid: zero if this buffer entry is unused, and one if it contains a
  packet that has been received (potentially out-of-order). This is set
  when the packet is received. The longest contiguous sequence of valid
  packets is delivered to the application layer from the base of the
  receive window. This field is not used with the sending window buffer.

- ack: one if this packet has been acknowledged, zero if not. This is
  set when a data packet is sent and updated when a matching
  acknowledgement has been received. If the packet has not been
  acknowledged when the timeout expires, it will be re-sent. This field
  is not used with the receive window buffer.

- timestamp: tracks the time when this packet was last sent to the
  receiver. If this packet has not been acknowledged by the timeout
  time, it should be resent. This field is not used with the receive
  window buffer.

- p: This is used to save the sent packet for re-transmission (send
  buffer) or for storing out-of-order packet in the receive buffer.

Requirements

Your implementation must adhere to the following requirements:

- Data output by the receiver must be identical to that sent by the
  sender — irrespective of packet loss, congestion, or corruption at the
  UDP (network) layer. You must ensure reliable transport through
  acknowledgment packets sent to the sender. The sender should detect
  missing acknowledgements and/or dropped or corrupted packets.

- Connection teardown should be handled appropriately. When an EOF is
  read from the application-side, you should send a zero-length payload
  (12-byte) packet to the receiver to indicate EOF. When an EOF is
  received, you should call conn_output() with a length of 0 bytes.

- You must support a window size larger than 1. The window size is
  specified by using the -w command-line option (e.g. -w 5 specifies
  both a sender and receiver size of 5 packets.

- Acknowledgements are cumulative, rather than selective. You should
  acknowledge the next packet you are expecting to receive (i.e. 1 more
  than the largest in-order sequence number that you have received).

- The sender should resend packets if the receiver does not acknowledge
  it within the timeout period. Retransmission is valid at anytime a
  packet remains unacknowledged after the timeout period. The default is
  2000ms (2 sec), but may be changed with the -t option to the program.

- Packets may be retransmitted an infinite number of times, but must
  retransmits must be attempted at least 5 times. You should call
  rdt_destroy() to destroy and close the connection if you give up on
  re-sending.

- Debugging should be done by directing error/debugging messages to
  standard error instead of standard output. To do this, use
  fprintf(stderr, "...") instead of the typical printf() calls, which
  write to standard output.

Functional Implementation

You need to implement six functions in reliable.c to complete this lab.
These descriptions have changed from the previous assignment. You are
free to write additional functions, but you must provide implementations
for the following functions:

- rdt_create(): In reliable.c, the reliable_state structure is intended
  to capture the state needed to provide reliable transport services for
  the connection. You will need to add additional fields to this
  structure. These new fields should be initialized in this function.
  This function will be called only once per connection and will be
  called by the driver code in rlib.c. You should save the timeout value
  from the cc structure here.

- rdt_destroy(): This function will be called when the remote end of the
  connection has terminated. You should manually call rdt_destroy()
  when:

  - An EOF has been read from the remote process (i.e. a zero-length
    payload)

  - An EOF has been read from the application layer input ( conn_input()
    returns -1)

    AND:

  - All packets have been acknowledged.

    AND:

  - All output data has been written to the application with
     conn_output().

- rdt_recvpkt(): When a new packet is received by the network layer, it
  will call rdt_recvpkt(). You should handle both data packets and ack
  packets here. When a data packet is received, it should be placed into
  the appropriate spot in the receive buffer, and the receiver window
  metadata updated. To deliver the data to the application layer, call
  rdt_output().

  When receiving an ack packet, update the sender window. If you update
  the base of the sender window, you should call rdt_read() to read more
  data from the application layer to send (if any is available).

- rdt_read(): This function may be called by the system when there is
  data ready from the application-layer or if sends have been
  acknowledged and there is free space in the send buffer. This function
  is called when data is ready to be read and sent to the receiver. You
  should repeatedly call conn_input() until it returns 0 or there are no
  additional buffers in the send window. When you read data from
   conn_input(), place it into a packet, save a copy in the next free
  spot in the send buffer, and deliver it to the receiver using
   conn_sendpkt().

- rdt_output(): This function is called whenever a data packet has been
  recieved (in rdt_recvpkt()), or the application-layer buffer has
  changed and more space is available to deliver received data. You
  should call conn_bufspace() to check that sufficient room exists
  before you call conn_output() to deliver the packet to the
  application-layer.

  Once you have delivered as much received data as you can, you should
  send a cumulative acknowledgement for all delivered data and adjust
  the receive window as needed.

- rdt_timer(): This function is called repeatedly whenever the poll
  timer expires, set to be 1/5 the rate of a retransmission interval, or
  about 400 ms. You should not retransmit every unacknowledged packet
  when the this function is called. You must ensure that the required
  timeout has occurred prior to retransmission and that any sent packets
  have not been previously acknowledged.

Compiling and Running

To make things simpler for building your program, there is a Makefile
included with the skeleton code. To build the reliable transport server
type: $ make.

There are also reference implementations that you can use for testing.
The skeleton code takes four options that can change the behavior of the
program. The -d option enables some limited debug messages, which may be
useful during development and the -l option will enable some rudimentary
logging. The -t option specifies the timeout value in milliseconds. The
-w option specifies the size of both the send and receive windows.

Testing

You should start by testing your implementation using connections over
the loopback interface, which has a hostname of localhost and an IP
address of 127.0.0.1. The loopback interface is reliable, so you won’t
see corruption or packet loss.

The cs-testing virtual server is configured with a network interface
that has been configured to lose 5% of the packets sent to it. You
should use this virtual host to test the reliability properties of your
implementation.

To use this machine, login to the cs-testing server and start your
program, specifying the port to listen on and the hostname/port
combination that will be connecting. By default, both TCP and UDP
servers will listen on all interfaces on a given host. The bind() system
call can be used to only listen on a specific interface, but by default
it will listen on all interfaces (incl. localhost). We can use this to
our advantage since the testing interfaces will also be listining for
traffic to your implementation.

On the other host (i.e. cslogin), run your program, but use the
 cs-testing-testnet interface (for example) to test with packet loss.

You should start by testing your implementation using connections over
the loopback interface, which has a hostname of localhost and an IP
address of 127.0.0.1. The loopback interface is reliable, so you won’t
see corruption or packet loss. You may use any port numbers that are not
in use by other students.

Sample Output

To run your implementation or use the reference implementations, the
program invocations, and output should look as follows:

Start by running the receiving process. This invocation listens on UDP
port 11000, and expects to talk to a peer at 127.0.0.1, port 12000.

           $ ./reliable 11000 localhost:12000
           [listening on UDP port 11000]
           Hello from sender!

To run the sender, we use the opposite syntax:

           $ ./reliable 12000 localhost:11000
           [listening on UDP port 11000]
           Hello from sender!
           ^D
           $

Testing with the lossy interface:

           cs-testing$ ./reliable 11000 cs-testing-testnet:12000
           [listening on UDP port 11000]
           Hello from sender!

To run the sender, we use the opposite syntax:

           cs-testing$ ./reliable 12000 cs-testing:11000
           [listening on UDP port 11000]
           Hello from sender!
           ^D
           $
